I watched the original Hobbit cartoon
when I was a kid let me show you inside
and I loved the actual structure I
didn't know then that I would build one
but after building a normal house and a
tree house me and my mom came here last
winter spend about two months building
the house I knew I want to do something
completely different
and so building inside of a mountain
seems like a pretty interesting project
my mom and I took off for ten days and
we traveled all around Oregon and
Washington looking for land for The
Hobbit Village that I wanted to build
there's a lot of land everywhere if you
look on Craigslist if you look on Zillow
you can find property so it's not really
that there's not a lot the issue is with
property that's in my price range I am
looking at property around 10,000 to
20,000 but usually there's a reason why
it's cheap either an easement problem
where the property just isn't accessible
and you would have to put in a lot of
infrastructure or maybe you have to
drive through a really crappy
neighborhood but if you're willing to be
off-grid there's there's a ton out there
this way I was able to get this five and
a half acres for $18,000 this property
was inexpensive because you can't get
any city utilities to bring power or
water up here it's not even an option
but it would be really
spensive if you try solar structure I
have one panel sitting on top but I have
room to add more if I move it the other
way and this is where my solar setup is
and I've got two big ol batteries
they're a 3000 watt inverter a control
panel and then a couple breakers one of
the good things about being off-grid
inch LAN is that they boast over 300
days of Sun even though they have all
four seasons so that was kind of crucial
for my build the most difficult thing
about building underground or in this
location is that I'm on a pretty steep
hillside which I wanted it to be these
rolling hills it's perfect although I
didn't want a road coming to the house
and so you actually Park down below but
that meant carrying all the lumber
bearing a house the support was integral
I mean it has to be safe it has to you
know when we do the backfill not
collapse so what I did was to buy six
lumber that's treated on 12 inch centers
and that's the whole box and then it
sheeted with three-quarter inch rim
plywood so that's a water wicking
plywood and then the rafters are also
two by twelves and they are one foot
apart so the structure is super solid it
also needed to be waterproof talk to
people about how far down water goes
which here the water line is about a
foot it doesn't usually sink lower than
that but we still put a French drain all
around the house it's wrapped with the
ice guard there's a tin roof on top and
that was to make sure that on the
backfill no rocks like pinprick through
it and then we'd have a leak because if
water gets in you can't just unburied it
and hatch something and also
moisture wicking insulation throughout
which just adds this other layer of
protection I just pretty much over built
the whole thing just in case and I mean
we had the backhoe driving on top of it
and and we had like five or six feet of
snow to and there was been no issues
we're on top there's only about a foot
of dirt towards the front end of the
house it gets a little bit more as it
goes out but there's not a whole lot on
top just because the weight is so heavy
and when that soil gets wet it's like
having a swimming pool on top of your
house we had the excavator come up here
this was all a hillside II had to kind
of figure out this and go back into the
mountain about 20 feet I just carved it
all out and set the dirt aside well we
built the structure and then you came
back and piled it all on the house ends
right about here this is the venting for
the bathroom but you can see the
hillside keeps going down
and I've replanted it it'll take two
years for it to be back to its normal
self when all this will grow in and you
won't be able to tell where we dug so I
have a two thousand gallon water tank
that's piped to the house and it is
filled via water truck right now which
is an ideal but drilling for water here
can be really expensive her estimates as
much as forty if you hit anything at all
so for right now this is what I'm doing
this house is permitted because it was
over the minimum size requirement to
have an unpermitted build so this is 288
square feet which is the largest house
that I've built yet seems the smallest
because it it's meant to be so cozy I
did have plans but there were just plans
that I had drawn out on graph paper and
done the math myself so some things did
have to change but for the most part we
worked off of those this house is
permitted the counting was awesome to
work with you know I let him know that
doing this really weird thing and they
hadn't ever done an underground house we
talked through my ideas and they thought
it all sounded good came out and checked
and everything was great so I read the
books and like watched the movies but
when I was getting closer to this build
I reread everything and I fact checked
things on forums and stuff to try to
make even though it's a tiny house try
to make it as legit as possible this is
what's called a wattle fence and we put
in rebar and then just wove these mostly
willow branches in between them this
house is actually a rectangle building
that we built this rounded awning off of
to give it that round look all of this
stuff on the outside is reclaimed and
kind of Mitch matched together because
the outside is supposed to be kind of a
little bit more unkept the original
design I only had it be the box and when
we were looking at it we had to build
this facade down and so I had all this
space behind there that we were just
fill with dirt and so I decided to put
two storage units on either side and
it's a really good thing we did because
now all the utilities can go inside of
there even though they aren't large so
I've got my water pump which is just a
shurflo pressure tank and then an
on-demand hot water heater so that 2x4
is bowed in because the rest of the
house we built with two by sixes on
twelve inch centers and because these
storage areas were just an afterthought
we did it with normal wood and it seemed
fine but once we added all that pressure
of the dirt it did bow them so they had
to be reinforced for this initial
structure I had a lot of friends and
family come and help so we were able to
get it framed pretty quickly and the
exterior finish and then we did the
backfill this is another storage closet
that doesn't have to get into nearly as
often because it just holds the propane
for the fireplace you can see that I
have the propane tanks on a scale just
to be able to tell if they're empty or
not so the door this was made out of an
old cable spool so I picked that up for
free it actually had to be cut down a
little bit because a six-foot wide door
was just too big of a swing and so right
now it's at five six I believe a local
artisan in Chelan made the hinges which
we didn't know if it was going to work
or not but it ended up working out
really well and since he knew I loved
like repurposing things he used an old
truck hitch for the door handle which I
think is really cool and this speakeasy
I picked up at an antique store before I
even started the build okay so the
outside of the door is really rough and
that's the look we are going for but the
inside of the door we wanted it to be a
really nice to reflect the interior so
this side is all sanded
and we've got this cool metal art piece
that Tristan did the same person who did
the hinges and it actually is two part
it's decorative but it's covering this
indention that's made from the school so
this is where the spool connected to the
bottom and then he also was able to weld
it around my little speakeasy there you
see who's coming went with a tree design
because I was designing the hobbit hole
as if the hobbit was a woodworker so if
you step inside you walk right into the
bedroom I did that because you can lay
in bed and look at the fantastic view so
the house is actually built as a
rectangle structure with a shed roof
although the shed roof is going the
opposite ways it would normally so it's
actually angling towards the door and
that's to mimic the hillside so that's
what I was working with but I actually
wanted to look burrowed out on the
inside so it was pretty challenging so
this is all framed like a skateboard
ramp and then we flipped that put it
into the corners and to sheetrock it we
actually used orderin sheetrock and we
wet both sides and kind of moved it
around with our hands let it sit for
like 10-15 minutes and then it would
Bend and so that went a lot smoother
than I thought so we actually have 1/2
inch up until about this point when the
wall starts to curve and then it's
quarter inch and it's it's pretty much
flush on there and it just bends around
and is screwed to that frame that I had
to make over and over and over again
throughout the house
the best part about being underground is
the insulating factor this house will
stay around 55 degrees all year round so
Chelan has been experiencing 100 degree
days and inside it feels like you're in
an air-conditioned building and you're
not in the winter or when it's colder
it's still at that setpoint of 55 ish
and the fireplace will heat that up in a
snap so that's definitely the best part
about living underground is the
insulating factor I'll show you when you
shut the door even though it's really
bright out it's super dark inside
without lights on and I just have a hook
here to lock yourself in but if I were
to turn out the light sigh cutting for
my death it's like pitch black if you
were wanting to do this type of house
you could put in the solar tubes and
obviously have the whole front B windows
but as going for a particular look and
didn't do that and I think that adds to
the overall feel of it being cozy and
comfortable so usually when I'm hanging
out here I have the door open let's a
lot of light in it's basically like
having an almost six-foot window and a
pretty spectacular view there so the
light fixture I made using some branches
that I picked up outside and then
figured that hobbits didn't have
electricity so I try to hide that as
much as possible by using the candles
although it's lit with an LED light all
the fixtures have a wood element because
the hobbit is a carpenter hobbit I got
these panels that I used for the
headboard and footboard at a secondhand
store and I think I paid $7 and they're
all real wood which is super cool but on
the footboard it has a really fun design
on the other side this side happened to
be painted though
and scraping off all that pain was a
pain so I only ended up as a feature
board on the bottom all the doorways I
wanted to be rounded and that was kind
of difficult because how do you frame a
round door so what we did is these are
actually tonguing grooves and so we just
cut them off at I think six inches is
about how wide that is and stacked them
and it curves naturally which is really
awesome and then put one by twelves just
cut into short pieces and it kind of was
perfect making this whole thing look
like one wood piece although we were
able to use a bunch of scrap stuff so
you can see where it joins together
right there okay it's of this store will
lead to the bathroom swinging door I got
a trough for the tub and you can
actually fit two people in it and it's
just from a farm supply store but I
actually finished the inside of the tub
with a porcelain refinisher that you can
get at the hardware store so this is a
shower area it's all wood all marine
sild so it can handle a lot of water I
have the rainfall showerhead and the
copper shower ring around it so this
bowl that I turned into a sink was the
very first purchase maybe even before I
purchased the land but the vanity that
it's sitting on was the last thing I
purchased I had to cut out around to
make it so I could add a scene here and
then just got some supplies down there
and also the antique mirror came with it
and it fit perfect um as far as a toilet
having a really modern toilet seem like
it would stick out a lot so I wanted a
wall-mounted pull chain toilet but
they're real
the expensive about $800 online for a
new one and I couldn't find any old one
so what I did but I just transformed a
cheap $50 toilet into a wall-mount
toilet so I put a tank up here this is
just 2 inch ABS pipe painted the antique
gold and then this is just a lamp chain
pull cord that is wrapped around the
flusher and so and I just made a normal
box to go around it I had these pieces
from a thrift store they were also like
really cheap I didn't know what I was
going to do with them and the house was
basically built and I still hadn't done
anything but when I went to make this
box I was able to tie in the top with
this piece around the pipe to hide those
screws and everything which you normally
wouldn't see because the tank would be
sitting there the floor is a pebble
floor so it's just get these big bags of
landscaping pebbles and mix it with a
two-part epoxy and then smooth it out on
there so this is the living room about
this huge fireplace so my cousin Dan and
his son Mason made the trek up from
Idaho to help me with this fireplace
they're both Masons so we built a frame
it's pretty large for the space but I
wanted it to have that sort of impact
most of it is faux rock there's a few
real rocks sprinkled in for size though
what I didn't realize is when I built it
to have real rock you need to pour a
hold footing under it because it'll
weigh so much so they're really cool I
can barely remember which ones are real
or fake now and it's already sliced off
on one side so you can just kind of
stick them in place it was a really fun
project and then I have a propane
fireplace insert so up top of the house
there's a chimney but it's not real this
is a vent less propane fireplace and you
can
and on down here maybe the most
time-consuming project this whole thing
was this cord wood floor cutting all
these pieces I think I counted that
there was 1,200 of just the bigger ones
not counting all these little ones I
just got him on the side of the road or
firewood that we had and started slicing
them into 1-inch thick pieces first I
tried to glue it with some lightweight
liquid nails and trowel it on because I
thought that'd be faster and that it
would take less money but after it sat
for two days it still wouldn't dry so we
had to take up a large section of the
floor scrape off all that lightweight
and what we ended up doing was just the
caulk gun and a heavyweight construction
adhesive and put it on the back of each
one and stuck them down and that
actually went pretty fast another kind
of consuming part not including the
cutting was the grouting so putting a
grout in between all these little pieces
there was just no good way to do it we
tried spoons
we tried icing bad we tried I mean I
think everything we tried putting it in
then putting the little pieces in really
hard and basically it ended up that we
just got a lot of people and everybody
just use their fingers and kind of
shoved it in and then the whole thing
was sanded and then coated I think five
layers of polyurethane so it can mop up
pretty easy and vacuum up and things
like that so this is the seating area
and they'll have a hole or I have this
really cool table that has a chess board
that we stained on there and you can
also take the chess pieces off and this
is where you could eat so I took a
existing pedestal table took off the top
and then put on uh just this stump and
it worked out pretty good I also have
these fun little hooks that that's
the glasses hanging I needed these
porthole round windows but buying around
window is really expensive so I bought
use windows $10 and double pane but it's
actually a rectangle in the frame and
then I got these rounds frames that were
on a mirror took the mirrors off use
them for the inside and outside of both
windows and then had to put all of this
wood in and it made kind of this deep
set window that they talked about in the
actual book and for drinking water since
the water is being trucked in it's only
used for the bathroom so for drinking
water I have a canister hidden behind
this wine barrel fill that up and then
this just goes back on there just flip
it up some water and then I need to
drink this
if I were living in it full-time or you
know there's not a lot I would change
but on my next comment hole I am going
to make the windows maybe like triple
the size so there will be more natural
light but there's not a lot that I'll
change in the next structures so I have
big plans for this piece of property I
want to do two more Hobbit holes the
other ones will be closer to the road I
wanted to get the most difficult one out
of the way you can see the other two
site and I plan on building them all the
hole on this now right there and then
one right here you can kind of see the
stakes of where it's laid out but kind
of right in those rocks this rough soil
is where the septic is buried got a
thousand gallon tank in there that all
three can be connected to so I want to
do two of those and then I want to build
a communal above-ground kitchen that
will look like an english style pub with
thatched roof so I really want to
complete the whole village look
go ahead I spent a lot of time here I've
been here when there wasn't anything in
here camping out and then I've also
stayed having it fully finished and it's
really pretty magical like the the
scenery is amazing and even when you
can't see the view and the clouds come
rolling in it's just a really magical
location most tiny houses bar on wills
to be portable but if you owned your own
land building and being underground it's
definitely a great option for a tiny
house the insulating factor is really
great so if you own the land I don't see
it being a problem at all you would also
need a hillside too but if you're
willing to be off-grid it opens up a
whole world of selection
you